Components as entities (v2) (#24728)
bevyengine/bevy: _release-content/migration-guides/components-as-entities.md

---
title: "Components as Entities"
pull_requests: [24728]
---

> - `ComponentId::new` now takes `Entity` as an argument instead of `usize`. For debugging, you can use `ComponentId::index`.

Reviewer: This line says to use a method that the next line says was removed :).  

```suggestion
- `ComponentId::new` now takes `Entity` as an argument instead of `usize`. For debugging, you can use `ComponentId::from_u32`.
```

---
title: "Components as Entities"
pull_requests: [24728]
---

- `ComponentId::new` now takes `Entity` as an argument instead of `usize`.
- `ComponentId::index` was removed.
- `ComponentId::from_u32` was added.
- `ComponentId` now implements `ContainsEntity` so the entity can be gotten through `ComponentId::entity`.
- `ComponentIdSet` is now an `EntityEquivalentHashSet` instead of a `FixedBitSet`. This means that methods like `union_with` no longer work, use `bitor_assign` instead.
- `ComponentIds` has been removed.
- `ComponentsRegistrator::new` now takes `EntityAllocator` instead of `ComponentIds`.

> - `ComponentsQueuedRegistrator::new` not takes `RemoteAllocator` instead of `ComponentIds`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `ComponentsQueuedRegistrator::new` now takes `RemoteAllocator` instead of `ComponentIds`.
```

---
title: "Components as Entities"
pull_requests: [24728]
---

- `ComponentId::new` now takes `Entity` as an argument instead of `usize`. For debugging, you can use `ComponentId::from_u32`.
- `ComponentId::index` was removed in favor of implementing `ContainsEntity`, call `ComponentId::entity` to get the underlying entity.
- `ComponentIdSet` is now an `EntityEquivalentHashSet` instead of a `FixedBitSet`. This means that methods like `union_with` no longer work, use `bitor_assign` instead.

> - `ComponentIds` has been removed. Instead of `ComponentIds`, `ComponentsRegistrator::new` now takes `EntityAllocator`, while `ComponentsQueuedRegistrator::new` now takes `RemoteAllocator`.

Reviewer 3: To be a complete migration guide, you probably need to do a full table of methods that replace a differently named one from `ComponentIdSet`. Like `ComponentIdSet::is_clear` -> `EntityEquivalentHashSet::is_empty`.

- `Access` and `EcsAccessType` no longer derive `Hash`.
- `ResourceEntities` was removed. The following methods have been removed with it: `World::resource_entities`, `EntityWorldMut::resource_entities`, `UnsafeWorldCell::resource_entities`. If you need the entity linked with a `ComponentId`, simply call `component_id.entity()`.

> - Despawning a resource entity has been upgraded from a `warn!` to a `panic!`, moreover, removing `IsResource` from a resource entity also panics.

Reviewer 3: So orphaned resource entities will remain allocated in a `IsResource`-only archetype? I don't think that will be a problem, even at use cases with lots of dynamically added resources. But we can add this behavior to the reasons why we do not want to track ticks for some components like `IsResource`.

Author: Yes, this is correct. This will change, but I'm discussing that in another comment.

> ---

Reviewer 4: From my unaddressed comment in the linked PR:

> > In order to get access to a resource entity, you usually need to go through two lookups: TypeId -> ComponentId -> Entity. The ComponentId -> Entity lookup can potentially be removed, speeding up resource lookup.
> 
> On the other hand note that you have introduced a `HashMap` lookup into every `ComponentId -> ComponentInfo` path! This happens for example when calling hooks, which is arguably pretty common too.
> 
> Sidenote: do we have a benchmark for hooks to measure this?
> 
> > Currently, one big downside of resources-as-components is that any components on resource entities aren't serialized. This forms a barrier for implementing required components for resources. Implementing this correctly is tricky. One of the problems we run into is that IsResource(ComponentId) cannot be directly copied over because ComponentIds are not consistent between worlds.
> 
> I'm not sure how this PR solves the issue. You'll still have the issue that the `EntityId` in the new world needs to match the `ComponentId` of the resource.

Author: As far as I know, we don't have benchmarks to measure hook access. The particular performance problem you describe can be fixed through #24102.

With regards to the `bevy_world_serialization` problem, this is where it gets clever. Mapping entities between worlds has already been solved through `SceneEntityMapper`. The idea is that we can use this just as well for `ComponentId`s when `ComponentId`s are just entities.

> ---

Reviewer 4: > `cargo bench -p benches --bench ecs` -> [benchmarks.txt](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/29295280/benchmarks.txt)

I can see some rather big regressions here:

```
group                                                                                                     after                                    before
-----                                                                                                     -----                                    ------
added_archetypes/archetype_count/10000                                                                    2.99     36.5±1.69ms        ? ?/sec      1.00     12.2±0.16ms        ? ?/sec
all_added_detection/50000_entities_ecs::change_detection::Sparse                                          1.72     84.7±0.81µs        ? ?/sec      1.00     49.4±2.98µs        ? ?/sec
all_added_detection/5000_entities_ecs::change_detection::Sparse                                           1.71      8.5±0.52µs        ? ?/sec      1.00      4.9±0.44µs        ? ?/sec
despawn_world_recursive/10000_entities                                                                    1.12  1547.4±24.08µs        ? ?/sec      1.00   1375.8±8.73µs        ? ?/sec
despawn_world_recursive/100_entities                                                                      1.14     16.4±1.42µs        ? ?/sec      1.00     14.4±1.31µs        ? ?/sec
ecs::resources::get                                                                                       1.30      8.1±0.45ns        ? ?/sec      1.00      6.2±0.52ns        ? ?/sec
ecs::resources::get_mut                                                                                   1.23      9.0±0.47ns        ? ?/sec      1.00      7.4±0.60ns        ? ?/sec
ecs::world::world_get::world_query_get_components_mut/unchecked_5_components_50000_entities               2.02  1547.9±74.62µs        ? ?/sec      1.00   766.5±38.31µs        ? ?/sec
empty_archetypes/for_each/1000                                                                            2.46     18.4±1.52µs        ? ?/sec      1.00      7.5±1.00µs        ? ?/sec
empty_archetypes/for_each/10000                                                                           25.88  276.3±58.63µs        ? ?/sec      1.00     10.7±0.97µs        ? ?/sec
empty_archetypes/iter/100                                                                                 1.18      8.4±1.02µs        ? ?/sec      1.00      7.1±0.51µs        ? ?/sec
empty_archetypes/iter/1000                                                                                2.58     19.1±2.33µs        ? ?/sec      1.00      7.4±0.84µs        ? ?/sec
empty_archetypes/iter/10000                                                                               27.51  279.2±54.97µs        ? ?/sec      1.00     10.1±2.66µs        ? ?/sec
empty_archetypes/par_for_each/10                                                                          1.15     10.1±1.13µs        ? ?/sec      1.00      8.7±0.65µs        ? ?/sec
empty_archetypes/par_for_each/100                                                                         3.70     32.4±3.23µs        ? ?/sec      1.00      8.8±1.06µs        ? ?/sec
empty_archetypes/par_for_each/1000                                                                        33.88  329.2±23.02µs        ? ?/sec      1.00      9.7±0.85µs        ? ?/sec
empty_archetypes/par_for_each/10000                                                                       191.38     3.3±0.06ms        ? ?/sec     1.00     17.3±2.24µs        ? ?/sec
empty_systems/0_systems                                                                                   1.14     16.1±4.09ns        ? ?/sec      1.00     14.2±1.49ns        ? ?/sec
events_iter/size_16_events_1000                                                                           1.20  776.3±115.84ns        ? ?/sec      1.00   647.5±49.46ns        ? ?/sec
events_iter/size_16_events_10000                                                                          1.32      8.5±0.57µs        ? ?/sec      1.00      6.4±0.53µs        ? ?/sec
events_iter/size_4_events_100                                                                             1.32     85.9±5.74ns        ? ?/sec      1.00     64.9±5.00ns        ? ?/sec
events_iter/size_4_events_1000                                                                            1.27   826.7±94.24ns        ? ?/sec      1.00   648.9±66.35ns        ? ?/sec
multiple_archetypes_none_changed_detection/100_archetypes_10000_entities_ecs::change_detection::Table     1.33    727.2±4.41µs        ? ?/sec      1.00    546.0±5.28µs        ? ?/sec
multiple_archetypes_none_changed_detection/100_archetypes_1000_entities_ecs::change_detection::Sparse     2.76    215.7±5.87µs        ? ?/sec      1.00     78.1±2.80µs        ? ?/sec
multiple_archetypemultiple_archetypes_none_changed_detection/5_archetypes_1000_entities_ecs::change_detection::Table        1.48      3.4±0.05µs        ? ?/sec      1.00      2.3±0.25µs        ? ?/sec
s_none_changed_detection/100_archetypes_1000_entities_ecs::change_detection::Table      2.11    100.3±2.18µs        ? ?/sec      1.00     47.5±0.95µs        ? ?/sec
multiple_archetypes_none_changed_detection/100_archetypes_100_entities_ecs::change_detection::Table       1.53      9.2±0.37µs        ? ?/sec      1.00      6.0±0.24µs        ? ?/sec
multiple_archetypes_none_changed_detection/100_archetypes_10_entities_ecs::change_detection::Sparse       1.24  1420.8±139.83ns        ? ?/sec     1.00  1147.1±161.44ns        ? ?/sec
multiple_archetypes_none_changed_detection/100_archetypes_10_entities_ecs::change_detection::Table        1.39  1212.4±121.47ns        ? ?/sec     1.00   869.3±85.26ns        ? ?/sec
multiple_archetypes_none_changed_detection/20_archetypes_10000_entities_ecs::change_detection::Sparse     1.22   325.4±22.68µs        ? ?/sec      1.00   266.6±11.61µs        ? ?/sec
multiple_archetypes_none_changed_detection/20_archetypes_10000_entities_ecs::change_detection::Table      1.49    140.3±3.66µs        ? ?/sec      1.00     94.2±0.89µs        ? ?/sec
multiple_archetypes_none_changed_detection/20_archetypes_1000_entities_ecs::change_detection::Table       1.52     13.9±0.24µs        ? ?/sec      1.00      9.1±0.17µs        ? ?/sec
multiple_archetypes_none_changed_detection/20_archetypes_100_entities_ecs::change_detection::Table        1.52  1526.8±146.79ns        ? ?/sec     1.00  1007.4±15.22ns        ? ?/sec
```

Some are pretty niche, but I find interesting that `ecs::resources::get` and `ecs::resources::get_mut` are there given that this PR claimed to speed up resource lookup.

Edit: or are after/before perhaps switched?

Author: I don't think after/before were switched. As per my [comment](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/24728#issuecomment-4789985084), while the micro benchmarks show some regressions, performance is not the only reason for this PR. Furthermore, the stress tests (which are more representative for real world usecases) don't show a significant decrease in performance.

Further furthermore: A fix for any performance issues already exists in #24102, but that's something best left for a separate PR.

Author: It's also possible that my laptop (bless their soul) is not super reliable for benchmarks, but it tried its best.
